---
title: Orthonormal Bases and the Projection Theorem
description: Finite-dimensional projections, Orthonormal Bases, Gram-Schmidt orthonormalization, Orthonormal expansions in L2
categories: Digital Communication
---

> The use of orthonormal bases simplifies almost everything concerning inner product spaces, and for infinite-dimensional expansions, orthonormal bases are even more useful. Gram-Schmidt procedure starting from an arbitrary basis $${s_1, . . . , s_n}$$ for an n-dimensional inner product subspace $$\mathcal S$$, generates an orthonormal basis for $$\mathcal S$$. The infinite dimensional projection theorem can provide simple and intuitive proofs and interpretations of limiting arguments and the approximations suggested by those limits.
  
### **Finite-dimensional Projections**  
Assume $$\mathcal V$$ is an inner product space, A vector $$\phi \in \mathcal V$$ is normalized if $$\|\phi\| = 1$$.   
The projection $$v_{|\phi} = \langle v, \phi \rangle \phi$$ for $$\|\phi\| = 1$$.   
An orthonormal set $$\{\phi_j\}$$ is a set such that $$\langle \phi_j, \phi_k \rangle = \delta_{jk}$$.   
If $$\{v_j\}$$ is orthogonal set, then $$\{\phi_j\}$$ is an orthonormal set where $$\phi_j = v_j/\|v_j\|$$.  
##### **Projection theorem**  
Assume that $$\{\phi_1, . . . , \phi_n\}$$ is an orthonormal basis for an n-dimensional subspace $$\mathcal S \subset \mathcal V$$. For each $$v \in V$$, there is a unique $$v_{| \mathcal S} \in \mathcal S$$ such that $$\langle v - v_{| \mathcal S}, s \rangle = 0$$ for all $$s \in \mathcal S$$. Furthermore, 
<center>$$v_{|s} = \sum_j \langle v, \phi_j \rangle \phi_j$$</center>.   
Proof outline:  Let $$v_{|S} = \sum_i \alpha_i\phi_i$$. Find the conditions on $$\alpha_1, . . . , \alpha_n$$ such that $$v − v_{|S}$$ is orthogonal to each $$\phi_i$$.  
<center>$$0 = \langle v - \sum_i \alpha_i\phi_i, \phi_j \rangle = \langle v, \phi_j \rangle - \alpha_j$$</center>
For $$v \in \mathcal S, v = \sum_j \alpha_j \phi_j, {\phi_j}$$ orthonormal basis of $$\mathcal S$$,  
<center>$$\|v\|^2 = \langle v, \sum_j \alpha_j\phi_j\rangle = \sum \alpha_j^* \langle v, \phi_j \rangle = \sum_j |\alpha_j|^2$$</center>
##### **Bessel's inequality**  
Let $$\mathcal S \subseteq \mathcal V$$ be the subspace spanned by the set of orthonormal vectors $${\phi_1, . . . , \phi_n}$$. For any $$v \in V$$
<center>$$0 \le \sum_{j=1}^n |\langle v, \phi_j \rangle|^2 \le \|v\|^2$$</center>
is the key to understanding the convergence of orthonormal expansions.
##### **LS error property**  
$$v_{|s}$$ is the choice for s that yields the Least Square Error(LS) or Minimum Square Error(MSE).   
The projection $$v_{|\mathcal S}$$ is the unique closest vector in $$S$$ to $$v$$; i.e., for all $$s \in \mathcal S$$,  
<center>$$\|v - v_{|\mathcal S}\|^2 \le \|v - s\|^2$$</center>
### **Gram-Schmidt orthonormalization**  
Given basis $$s_1, . . . , s_n$$ for an inner product subspace, find an orthonormal basis.  
$$\phi_1 = s_1/\|s_1\|$$ is an orthonormal basis for subspace $$\mathcal S_1$$ generated by $$s_1$$.  
Given orthonormal basis $$\phi_1, . . . , \phi_k$$ of subspace $$\mathcal S_k$$ generated by $$s_1, . . . , s_k$$, project $$s_{k+1}$$ onto $$\mathcal S_k$$.   
<center>$$\phi_{k+1} = {(s_{k+1})_{\bot \mathcal S_k} \over \|(s_{k+1})_{\bot \mathcal S_k}\| }$$</center>
The Gram-Schmidt algorithm gives a simple construction of the q's from the a's in factorization of A = QR (orthonormal columns times upper triangular).  
### **Orthonormal expansions in $$L^2$$**  
For $$L^2$$, the projection theorem can be extended to a countably infinite dimension.
##### **Infinite-dimensional projection**  
Let $$\{\phi_m, 1 \le m \lt \infty\}$$ be a set of orthonormal functions, and let $$v$$ be any $$L^2$$ vector. Then there is a unique $$L^2$$ vector $$u$$ such that $$v − u$$ is orthogonal to each $$\phi_m$$ and
<center>$$\lim\limits_{n \to \infty}\|u - \sum\limits_{m=1}^n\langle v, \phi_m \rangle \phi_m\| = 0$$</center>
Outline of proof: Let $$\mathcal S_n$$ be subspace spanned by $$\phi_1, . . . , \phi_n$$.  
<center>$$v_{|\mathcal S_n} = \sum\limits_{k=1}^n \alpha_k \phi_k = \sum\limits_{k=1}^n \langle v, \phi_k \rangle \phi_k$$</center>
<center>$$\|v_{|\mathcal S_m} - v_{|\mathcal S_n}\|^2 = \sum\limits_{k=n}^m |\alpha_k|^2 \to 0$$</center> 
$$v_{|\mathcal S_n}$$ forms a *Cauchy sequence*. By the *Riesz-Fischer theorem*($$L^2$$ waveforms has an $$L^2$$ limit), $$l.i.m. v_{\mathcal S_n} = u$$ exists.   
This shows that the fourier series converges in $$L^2$$.

Reference:  
1. Robert Gallager. (2006). *6.450 Digital Communication*. MIT OpenCourseWare (http://ocw.mit.edu/)
2. Robert G.Gallager. (2009). *Principles of Digital Communication*. (New York: Cambridge University Press).  
3. Gilbert Strang. (2007 ). *Computational Science and Engineering*. (Wellesley-Cambridge Press).
