---
title: PAM and Its Carrier Transmission
description: PAM, The Nyquist criterion, FSK, PSK
categories: Digital Communication
---

>  PAM, or mplitude shift keying (ASK) is a one-dimensional modulated signal set with $$M = 2^b$$ signals in the constellation, the constellation is a set of real numbers.  A PAM modulator is determined by the signal constellation $$\mathcal A$$, the signal interval $$T$$ and the real $$L^2$$ modulation pulse $$p(t)$$. In most cases, the pulse waveform $$p(t)$$ is a baseband waveform and the resulting modulated waveform u(t) is then modulated up to some passband. 
  
### **Pulse amplitude modulation**
PAM is modulated as $$u(t) = \sum_k u_k p(t−kT)$$.   
A standard PAM signal set uses equi-spaced signals symmetric around 0. $$\mathcal A = \{-d(M-2)/2, ... , -d/2, d/2, ... , d(M-1)/2 \}$$
Let $$U_k$$ be be a standard M-PAM random variable where the M points each have probability $$1/M$$. Let $$Q$$ be the quantization error for the quantizer and Uk be the quantization point. Thus $$U = U_k + Q$$. Observe that for each quantization point the quantization error is uniformly distributed over $$[−d/2, d/2]$$. This means that $$Q$$ is zero mean and statistically independent of the quantization point $$U_k$$. It follows that  
<center>$$E[U^2] = E[(Q + U_k)^2] = E[U_k^2] + E[Q^2] = E[U_k^2] + d^2 \over 12$$</center>
For Uniform distribution $$X ~ U(a,b)$$, the $$Var(X) = (b-a)^2 \over 12$$, $$E[U^2] = (dM)^2 \over 12$$. It then follows that
<center>$$E[U_k^2] = {d^2(M^2 - 1)} \over 12 = {d^2(2^{2b} - 1)} \over 12$$</center>
For $$b$$ greater than 2, $$2^{2b} −1$$ is approximately $$2^{2b}$$, so we see that each unit increase in $$b$$ increases $$E_s$$ by a factor of 4. Thus increasing the rate $$R$$ by increasing $$b$$ requires impractically large energy for large $$b$$.
##### **Channel imperfections**
Physical waveform channels are always subject to propagation delay, attenuation, and noise.  
Estimating the fixed delay at the receiver is a significant problem called timing recovery, but is largely separable from the problem of recovering the transmitted data. This means that filtering can be non-causal - it can be incorporated into the timing recovery.   
The link budget in a communication system is largely separable from other issues, so the amplitude scale at the transmitter is usually normalized to that at the receiver.   
For now, we simply assume that noise can alter each received signal independently by at most a fixed amount.   
##### **Choice of the modulation pulse**
The following objectives contribute to the choice of $$p(t)$$, we need a compromise between time decay and bandwidth.   
* $$p(t)$$ must be $$0$$ for $$t < −\tau$$ for some finite $$\tau$$.
* $$\hat p(f)$$ should be essentially baseband limited to some bandwidth $$B_b$$ slightly larger than $$1\over {2T}$$.
* The retrieval of the sequence $${u_k; k \in \Bbb Z}$$ from the noisy received waveform should be simple and relatively reliable.   
From *Paley-Wiener theorem*, functions cannot be both time and frequency limited. we will replace the first objective above with the objective of choosing $$p(t)$$ to approach $$0$$ rapidly as $$t \to -\infty$$.   
##### **PAM demodulation**
The demodulator first filters the received waveform using a filter with impulse response $$q(t)$$. It then samples the output at $$T$$-spaced sample times. That is, the received filtered waveform is   
<center>$$r(t) = \int_{-\infty}^{\infty} u(\tau) q(t - \tau) d\tau = \int_{-\infty}^{\infty} \sum_k u_k p(\tau - kT) q(t - \tau) d\tau =  \sum_k u_k g(t - kT) \text{where} g(t) = p(t)*q(t)$$</center>
and the received samples are $$r(T), r(2T), ...,$$ .
why choose a linear filter followed by sampling seems artificial:   
when noise is added, that this all makes sense as a layered solution.
There is **no intersymbol interference** if $$r(kT) = u_k$$ for each integer $$k$$.   
A waveform $$g(t)$$ is **ideal Nyquist** with period $$T$$ if $$g(kT) = \delta(k)$$.   
If $$g(t)$$ is ideal Nyquist, then $$r(kT) = u_k$$ for all $$k \in \mathcal Z$$. If $$g(t)$$ is not ideal Nyquist, then $$r(kT) \neq u_k$$ for some $$k$$ and choice of $${u_k}$$.   
### **The Nyquist criterion**
Let $$s(t)$$ be the baseband-limited waveform generated by the samples of $$g(t)$$,
<center>$$s(t) = \sum_k g(kT) sinc(t \over T − k)$$</center>
$$g(t)$$ is ideal Nyquist iff $$s(t) = sinc(t/T)$$ i.e., iff $$\hat s(f) = T rect(fT)$$
From the aliasing theorem,
<center>$$\hat s(f) = \sum_m \hat g(f + m \over T) rect(fT)$$</center>
Nyquist criterion : 
Let $$\hat g(f)$$ be $$L^2$$ and satisfy the condition $$ lim_{|f|\to \infty} \hat g(f)|f|^{1+\varepsilon} = 0$$ for some $$\varepsilon > 0$$. Then the inverse transform, $$g(t)$$, of $$\hat g(f)$$ is ideal Nyquist with interval $$T$$ if and only if $$\hat g(f)$$ satisfies the Nyquist criterion for $$T$$, defined as
<center>$$ l.i.m. \sum_m \hat g(f + m/T) rect(fT) = T rect(fT)$$</center>
This says that out of band frequencies can help in avoiding intersymbol interference.   
##### **Band-edge symmetry**
The choice of $$\hat g(f)$$ involves a tradeoff between making $$\hat g(f)$$ smooth, so as to avoid a slow time decay in $$g(t)$$, and reducing the excess of $$B_b$$ over the Nyquist bandwidth $$W_b$$. This excess is expressed as a rolloff factor, defined to be $$(B_b/W_b) − 1$$, usually expressed as a percentage.   
PAM filters in practice often have raised cosine transforms, which simply rounds off the step discontinuity in $$rect({f \over 2W_b})$$ in such a way as to maintain the Nyquist criterion while making $$\hat g(f)$$ continuous with a continuous derivitive, thus guaranteeing that $$g(t)$$ decays asympototically with $$1/t^3$$.   

   
Reference:  
1. Robert Gallager. (2006). *6.450 Digital Communication*. MIT OpenCourseWare (http://ocw.mit.edu/)
2. Robert G.Gallager. (2009). *Principles of Digital Communication*. (New York: Cambridge University Press).  
3. Gilbert Strang. (2007 ). *Computational Science and Engineering*. (Wellesley-Cambridge Press).
4. John M. Cioffi. (2007). *EE 379A Digital Communication: Signal Processing*. (https://www.stanford.edu/).
5. John G. Proakis. (2008). *Digital Communications, Fifth Edition*. (New York: McGraw-Hill).